java-generic-outbox (#691)
cap-js/docs: java/outbox.md

Alternatively, you can add `using from '@sap/cds/srv/outbox';` to your base model. You need to update the tenant models after deployment. You don't need to update MTX Sidecar in this case.
:::

CAP Java by default provides two persistent outbox services:

-  `OutboxService.PERSISTENT_ORDERED_NAME` which is used by default by messaging services and
-  `OutboxService.PERSISTENT_UNORDERED_NAME` which is used by default by the AuditLog service.

> 

Author: @BraunMatthias I don't get your comment 🙈

> 

Reviewer: I'd prefer the alias names DefaultOutboxOrdered and DefaultOutboxUnordered here.

- `storeLastError` (default `true`): If this flag is enabled, the last error that occurred, when trying to emit the message
of an entry, is stored. The error is stored in the element `lastError` of the entity `cds.outbox.Messages`.

::: warning _❗ Warning_
The configuration section `outbox.persistent` in the _application.yaml_ is deprecated. If it is still available in the
_application.yaml_ it will be taken as a default, if none of the aforementioned outboxes configured explicitly:

```yaml
cds:
  outbox:
    persistent:
      enabled: true
      maxAttempts: 10
      storeLastError: true
```

If `enabled` (default `true`) is set to `false`, no persistent outbox will be created.
:::

::: tip
Persistent outbox is supported starting with these version: `@sap/cds: 5.7.0`,  `@sap/cds-compiler: 2.11.0` (`@sap/cds-dk: 4.7.0`)
:::

## Generic Outbox

::: tip
The generic outbox is supported starting with version `com.sap.cds:cds-services-bom:2.7.0`.
:::

### Configuring Custom Outboxes

Custom outboxes can be configured using the `outbox.services` section in the _application.yaml_:

```yaml
cds:
  outbox:
    services:
      MyCustomOutbox1:

>         maxAttempts: 5

Author: This is not yet implemented... Will be delivered later

>         maxAttempts: 5

Reviewer: ok - ordered is the default? How did we with the two default instances?

>         maxAttempts: 5

Author: @BraunMatthias Yes, as of now ordered is the default; I have to revert your proposal for the description of the two default outbox service instances, as they process the entries in order and sequentially as of now.

```

Afterwards it's possible to get the outbox instances in the source code from the service catalog:

```java
OutboxService myCustomOutbox1 = cdsRuntime.getServiceCatalog().getService(OutboxService.class, "MyCustomOutbox1");
OutboxService myOtherCustomOutbox = cdsRuntime.getServiceCatalog().getService(OutboxService.class, "MyOtherCustomOutbox");
```

Alternatively it's possible to inject them into a Spring component:

```java
@Component
public class MySpringComponent {
  private final OutboxService myCustomOutbox1;
  private final OutboxService myOtherCustomOutbox;

  public MySpringComponent(@Qualifier("MyCustomOutbox1") OutboxService myCustomOutbox1;
    @Qualifier("MyOtherCustomOutbox") OutboxService myOtherCustomOutbox) {

    this.myCustomOutbox1 = myCustomOutbox1;
    this.myOtherCustomOutbox = myOtherCustomOutbox;
  }
}
```

### Outboxing Arbitrary CAP Services

Outbox services support outboxing of arbitrary CAP services. Typical use cases are remote OData
service calls, but also supports calls to other CAP services to decouple them from the business logic flow.

The API `OutboxService.outboxed(Service)` is used to wrap services with outbox handling. Events triggered

> on the wrapper are stored in the outbox first, and executed asynchronously. Relevant information from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on the wrapper are stored in the outbox first and are executed asynchronously later. Relevant information from
```

the `RequestContext` is stored with the event data, however the user context is downgraded to a system user context.

The following example shows how to outbox a CAP Java service:

```java
OutboxService myCustomOutbox1 = ...;
Service service = ...;
Service outboxedService = myCustomOutbox1.outboxed(service);
```

The outboxed service should be cached, if it is frequently used as outboxing a service is an
expensive operation. Any service that implements the interface `com.sap.cds.services.Service`
or an inherited interface can be outboxed. Each call to the outboxed service is asynchronously
executed, if the API method internally calls the method `com.sap.cds.services.Service.emit(EventContext)`.

::: warning _❗ Warning_
All calls to `run` methods of a service that implements the interface `com.sap.cds.services.cds.CqnService`

> return null since they are executed asynchronously. The method `com.sap.cds.services.cds.CqnService.run(CqnSelect, ...)`

Reviewer: The method `com.sap.cds.services.cds.CqnService.run(CqnSelect, ...)` -> omit this sentence

should not be called since the result will be lost because of the asynchronous behaviour of outboxed services.
:::

> A service wrapped by an outbox can be unboxed by calling the API `OutboxService.unboxed(Service)`; method calls to the unboxed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A service wrapped by an outbox can be unboxed by calling `OutboxService.unboxed(Service)`. Method calls to the unboxed
```

-  `OutboxService.PERSISTENT_ORDERED_NAME` which is used by default by messaging services and
-  `OutboxService.PERSISTENT_UNORDERED_NAME` which is used by default by the AuditLog service.

The default configuration for both outboxes can be overridden using the `cds.outbox.services` section, for example in the _application.yaml_:

```yaml
cds:
  outbox:
    services:
      DefaultOutboxOrdered:
        maxAttempts: 10
        storeLastError: true
      DefaultOutboxUnordered:
        maxAttempts: 10
        storeLastError: true
```

You have the following configuration options:
- `maxAttempts` (default `10`): The number of unsuccessful emits until the message is ignored. It will still remain in the database table.
- `storeLastError` (default `true`): If this flag is enabled, the last error that occurred, when trying to emit the message
of an entry, is stored. The error is stored in the element `lastError` of the entity `cds.outbox.Messages`.

::: tip
Persistent outbox is supported starting with these version: `@sap/cds: 5.7.0`,  `@sap/cds-compiler: 2.11.0` (`@sap/cds-dk: 4.7.0`)
:::

### Configuring Custom Outboxes { #custom-outboxes}

> Custom outboxes can be configured using the `cds.outbox.services` section, for example in the _application.yaml_:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Custom persistent outboxes can be configured using the `cds.outbox.services` section, for example in the _application.yaml_:
```

```yaml
cds:
  outbox:
    services:
      MyCustomOutbox:
        maxAttempts: 5
        storeLastError: false
      MyOtherCustomOutbox:
        maxAttempts: 10
        storeLastError: true
```

Afterwards you can access the outbox instances from the service catalog:

```java
OutboxService myCustomOutbox = cdsRuntime.getServiceCatalog().getService(OutboxService.class, "MyCustomOutbox");
OutboxService myOtherCustomOutbox = cdsRuntime.getServiceCatalog().getService(OutboxService.class, "MyOtherCustomOutbox");
```

Alternatively it's possible to inject them into a Spring component:

```java
@Component
public class MySpringComponent {
  private final OutboxService myCustomOutbox;

  public MySpringComponent(@Qualifier("MyCustomOutbox") OutboxService myCustomOutbox) {
    this.myCustomOutbox = myCustomOutbox;
  }
}
```

::: warning _❗ Warning_
Removing a custom outbox from the `cds.outbox.services` section doesn't remove the
entries from the `cds.outbox.Messages` table. The entries remain in the `cds.outbox.Messages` table and won't get
processed anymore.

Before removing a custom outbox, it must be ensured that there are no unprocessed entries left.
:::

> ### Outboxing CAP Service Events

Reviewer 2: I think this should be one level higher, not below "Persistent Outbox"

the `RequestContext` is stored with the event data, however the user context is downgraded to a system user context.

The following example shows how to outbox a CAP Java service:

```java
OutboxService myCustomOutbox = ...;
CqnService remoteS4 = ...;
CqnService outboxedS4 = myCustomOutbox.outboxed(remoteS4);
```

The outboxed service can be cached; caching them is thread-safe.
Any service that implements the interface `com.sap.cds.services.Service`
or an inherited interface can be outboxed. Each call to the outboxed service is asynchronous
executed, if the API method internally calls the method `com.sap.cds.services.Service.emit(EventContext)`.

::: warning _❗ Warning_
All calls to `CqnService.run` methods will return null since they are executed asynchronously.
:::

A service wrapped by an outbox can be unboxed by calling the API `OutboxService.unboxed(Service)`. Method calls to the unboxed
service are executed synchronously without storing the event in an outbox.

::: tip
The default outbox services can be used for outboxing arbitrary CAP services. If you detect scaling issue,
you can define custom outboxes that can be used for outboxing.
:::

### Technical Outbox API

> The generic outbox provides the technical API `OutboxService.submit(String event, OutboxMessage)` that can

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each outbox service provides the technical API `OutboxService.submit(String, OutboxMessage)` that can
```

> Each outbox service provides the technical API `OutboxService.submit(String, OutboxMessage)` that can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Outbox services provides the technical API `OutboxService.submit(String, OutboxMessage)` that can
```

> be used to outbox custom messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be used to send custom messages via outbox.
```

When submitting a custom message, an `OutboxMessage` needs to be provided that can contain parameters for the
event. As the `OutboxMessage` instance is serialized and stored in the database, all data provided in that message

> must be serializable deserializable to JSON. The following example shows the submission of a custom message to an outbox:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
must be serializable/deserializable to/from JSON. The following example shows the submission of a custom message to an outbox:
```

> must be serializable/deserializable to/from JSON. The following example shows the submission of a custom message to an outbox:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
must be serializable and deserializable to respectively from JSON. The following example shows the submission of a custom message to an outbox:
```

```java
OutboxService outboxService;

OutboxMessage message = OutboxMessage.create();
Map<String, Object> parameters = new HashMap<>();
parameters.put("name", "John");
parameters.put("lastname", "Doe");
message.setParams(parameters);

outboxService.submit("myEvent", message);
```

> A handler for the custom message must be registered on the outbox service instance to perform do the processing of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A handler for the custom message must be registered on the outbox service instance to perform the processing of the
```

message as shown in the following example:

```java
OutboxService outboxService;

outboxService.on("myEvent", null, (ctx) -> {
  OutboxMessageEventContext context = ctx.as(OutboxMessageEventContext.class);
  OutboxMessage message = context.getMessage();
  Map<String, Object> params = message.getParams();
  String name = (String) param.get("name");
  String lastname = (String) param.get("lastname");

  // Perform task for myEvent

  ctx.setCompleted();
});
```

It must be made sure that the handler is setting the context to completed before returning.
Also the handler shall only be registered once on the outbox service.

[Learn more about event handlers.](./provisioning-api){.learn-more}

## Troubleshooting

To manually delete entries in the `cds.outbox.Messages` table, you can either
expose it in a service or programmatically modify it using the `cds.outbox.Messages`
database entity.

::: tip
Avoid to read all entries of the `cds.outbox.Messages` table at once as the size of an entry is unpredictable

> as it depends on the size of the payload, use paging logic instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and depends on the size of the payload. Prefer paging logic instead.
```
